---
layout: post
title: "Gaussian Variables and Gaussian Processes"
permalink: /2023-07-14/
usemathjax: true
categories: Probability-and-Statistics
math: true
mathjax: true
---   

> This is the first of possibly a series of blog posts recording my study of the book *Brownian Motion, Martingales, and Stochastic Calculus* by Jean-François Le Gall.
A useful reference is this [solution manual](https://jupiter.math.nycu.edu.tw/~sheu/Solution.pdf) by Te-Chun Wang.  


# Gaussian Random Variables   

In this chapter, we will be working with the probability space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbb{P})$.  

A **standard Gaussian random variable** is a random variable $X$ with density function   

$$
f(x) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}}e^{-x^2/2}
$$  

for all $x \in \mathbb{R}$.

Probably for the sake of convenience, a **Gaussian random variable** is defined to be a random variable $Y$ with any of the following equivalent properties:  

- $Y=\sigma X + m$ where $X$ is a standard Gaussian random variable, $\sigma > 0$ and $m \in \mathbb{R}$, or

- $Y$ has density function $f(x) = \frac{1}{\sigma\sqrt{2\pi}}e^{-(x-m)^2/2\sigma^2}$ for all $x \in \mathbb{R}$  

- $Y$ has characteristic function $\phi(t) = \mathbb{E}[e^{itY}] = \exp({itm - \sigma^2t^2/2})$ for all $t \in \mathbb{R}$

>  The characteristic function is well-defined by first considering the integral when $\mathbb{E}[e^{\lambda Y}]$ for $\lambda \in  \mathbb{R}$, and then using analytic continuation ([Identity theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Identity_theorem))

## Properties of Gaussian Random Variables

- If $X$ and $Y$ are independent Gaussian random variables, then $X+Y$ is also a Gaussian random variable with $\mu=\mu_X+\mu_Y$ and $\sigma^2=\sigma_X^2+\sigma_Y^2$.  

- If $X,Y$ are uncorrelated Gaussian random variables, then $X$ and $Y$ are independent.  

- If $(X)_n$ is a sequence of Gaussian random variables $\mathcal{N}(m_n, \sigma_n^2)$ converging in $L^2$ to $X$, then:  
   - $X$ is a Gaussian random variable $\mathcal{N}(m, \sigma^2)$, $m=\lim m_n$ and $\sigma^2=\lim \sigma_n^2$ 
   - The convergence also holds in all $L^p$ spaces for $p \in [1, \infty)$

The proof of the first result is straightforward. For part 1 of the second result, we use the convergence of characteristic functions.   
Part 2 follows from the uniform integrability of $Y_n=\vert X_n-X\vert ^p$, since we have $\sup_n \mathbb{E}[\vert X_n-X\vert ^q]<\infty$, which follows from $\sup_n \mathbb{E}[\vert X_n\vert ^q]=\sup_n \mathbb{E}[\vert \sigma_n X_n + m_n\vert ^q]<\infty$ and the fact that $X_n$ converges in $L^2$ to $X$.  

### Quick reminder of uniform integrability  

A sequence of random variables $(X_n)$ is **uniformly integrable** if 

$$
\sup_n \mathbb{E}[\vert X_n\vert 1_{\vert X_n\vert \geq a}]=0
$$

when $a \to \infty$.   

**Theorem** in (Grimmett and Stirzaker's): If a sequence of random variables $(X_n)$ that converges in probability to $X$, then TFAE:  

- $(X_n)$ is uniformly integrable.  

- ($L^1$ convergence) $\mathbb{E}[\vert X_n\vert ]$ is bounded for all $n$, $\mathbb{E}[\vert X\vert ]<\infty$ and $\mathbb{E}[\vert X_n-X\vert ]\to 0$ as $n \to \infty$.  
  
-  $\mathbb{E}[\vert X_n\vert ]$ is bounded for all $n$ and $\mathbb{E}[\vert X_n\vert ] \to \mathbb{E}[\vert X\vert ]$ as $n \to \infty$.  

This is a somewhat probabilistic version of Vitali's convergence theorem.  

# Gaussian Vectors   

We now work with a more abstract metric space $(E, d)$. (e.g. $E=\mathbb{R}^d$ with the Euclidean metric). And unless specified, we will be working with centered Gaussian vectors, which have mean $0$.  

  
A **Gaussian vector** is a random variable $X$ with values in $E$, satisfying: for all $u \in E$, $\langle u, X \rangle$ is a Gaussian random variable.   


> **Example**: In $\mathbb{R}^d$, a Gaussian vector is a random variable $(X_1, \dots, X_d)$ with $X_i$ being independent Gaussian random variables, since the sum of independent Gaussian random variables is a Gaussian random variable.   


## Properties of Gaussian Vectors  

- The **mean** is characterized by $m_X \in E$, s.t. for all $u \in E$.   

$$
\mathbb{E}[\langle u, X \rangle] = \langle u, m_X \rangle
$$

- The **variance** is characterized by $q_X(u)$ a nonnegative quadratic form on $E$, s.t. for all $u \in E$.   

$$
\mathrm{var}(\langle u, X \rangle) = q_X(u)
$$ 

> An explicit form of $q_X(u)$ can be worked out by considering the orthonormal basis on $E$. We can obtain for $u=\sum u_j e_j$,   

$$
q_X(u) = \sum_{j, k=1}^d u_j u_k \ \mathrm{cov}(X_j, X_k)
$$     

> where $\mathrm{cov}(X_j, X_k)$ is the covariance of $X_j$ and $X_k$  
> Thus, a unique symmetric endomorphism $\gamma_X$ on $E$ can be defined by  
> $$q_X(u) = \langle u, \gamma_X(u) \rangle$$
> In the usual $\mathbb{R}^d$ case, $\gamma_X$ is the covariance matrix, which is semi-positive definite.  

- The random variables $(X_1, \ldots, X_d)$ are independent if and only if the covariance matrix is diagonal or equivalently if $q_X$ is diagonal in the orthogonal basis.  

The following theorem shows the existence of a Gaussian vector for any nonnegative symmetric endomorphism on $E$ 
> Namely given a suitable matrix, we can use it as a covariance matrix to define a Gaussian vector, this is more interesting in the Gaussian process case 

<div class="transparent-box">
   <b>Theorem</b>: Let 
   $\gamma$ 
   be a nonnegative symmetric endomorphism on 
   $E$
   . Then there exists a Gaussian vector 
   $X$
    with 
    $\gamma_X=\gamma$. 
</div>  
 

The proof is constructive. We first find a basis in which $\gamma$ is diagonal, and then construct a Gaussian vector with the diagonal covariance matrix with variance being eigenvalues of $\gamma$.  

Like a Gaussian random variable, a Gaussian vector is uniquely determined by its mean and covariance matrix.  


<div class="transparent-box">
   <b>Distribution of Gaussian Vectors 1</b>: Let 
   $X$
    be a Gaussian vector with mean 
    $m$
     and covariance matrix 
     $\gamma_X$. Choose 
     $(e_1,\ldots, e_d)$ 
     to be a basis in which
     $\gamma_X$ is diagonal, where the eigenvalues are  
     $$\lambda_1 \geq \lambda_2 \geq \ldots \geq \lambda_r >0 = \lambda_{r+1} = \ldots = \lambda_d$$  
     with 
     $r$
      being the rank of 
      $\gamma_X$. 
      Then 
      $X$
       has the form 
       $$X = \sum_{j=1}^r Y_j e_j$$
       where 
       $(Y_1,\ldots, Y_r)$
       are independent standard Gaussian random variables with variance
       $\lambda_j$.
</div>   

We can now characterize the distribution of a Gaussian vector.  
<div class="transparent-box">
   <b>Distribution of Gaussian Vectors 2</b>: Using the same notation as above. If 
$P_X$ denotes the distiribution of 
$X$,
then the topological support of it is the vector space spanned by 
$e_1,\ldots, e_r$,
$P_X$ is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure if and only if 
$r=d$, which gives the density
$$
p_X(x) = \frac{1}{(2\pi)^{d/2} \sqrt{\det \gamma_X}} \exp\left(-\frac{1}{2} \langle x, \gamma_X^{-1}(x) \rangle\right)
$$ 
</div>   

> The if and only if conditions holds as in $d$ dimensions, the Lebesgue measure of a space of smaller dimension is $0$. The density is shown by considering $\mathbb{E}[g(X)]$ for an arbitrary continuous bounded function $g$ (show by monotone convergence theorem that for any indicator $\mathbf{1}_A$, there is $g_n \uparrow \mathbf{1}_A$).


# Gaussian Processes   

> Similarly, we consider only centered Gaussian processes.  

Gaussian processes can be thought as an infinite collection of Gaussian random variables, in which case, the tools and terminologies from functional analysis are useful.  

We first define a **Gaussian space** as a closed, linear, subspace of the Hilbert space $L^2(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbb{P})$, which contains only centered Gaussian random variables.  

> This means we are always assuming finite variance.  

A general **random process** with values in $(E, \mathcal{E})$ is a family of random variables $(X_t)_{t \in T}$ with values in $E$, where $T$ is an arbitrary index set.  

Then with $E=\mathbb{R}$, a **Gaussian process** is a random process $(X_t)_{t \in T}$, s.t. for all $t_1, \ldots, t_n \in T$, their linear combination is a Gaussian random variable.   

> The closed linear subspace spanned by $X_{t_1}, \ldots, X_{t_n}$ is a Gaussian space, which is called the **Gaussian space** generated by $(X_t)_{t \in T}$.  The closedness follows from the $L^2$ limit of Gaussian random variables being Gaussian.   

## Properties of Gaussian Processes  


Furthermore, due to the independence properties of Gaussian random variables, we can work with them in a Hilbert space setting.  


<div class="transparent-box">
   <b>Theorem</b>: If 
$(H)_{i\in I}$ is a collection of linear subspaces of a Gaussian space, 
they are pairwise orthogonal in
$L^2$ if and only if the sigma fields
$\sigma((H)_i)$ are independent.  
</div>

> Here the notation $\sigma(H_i)$ means the sigma field generated by random variables in the collection $H_i$ *i.e.* the smallest sigma field that makes all the random variables in $H_i$ measurable.  

The proof is an application of the Monotone Class Theorem.  

This orthogonality and independence property enables us to compute conditional expectation as an orthogonal projection as the following theorems show:  

<div class="transparent-box">
    <b> Conditional Expectation </b>: Let 
    $H$ be a Gaussian space and 
    $K$ be a closed linear subspace of
    $H$. Denote 
    $p_K$ as the orthogonal projection onto
    $K$ in the Hilbert space
    $L^2(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbb{P})$.
    Then for any $X\in H$,
    $$
    \mathbb{E}[X \mid K] = p_K(X)
    $$
</div>

> A consequence of the theorem is that the best approximation to a Gaussian random variable $X_3$ in a closed subspace spanned by $(X_1, X_2, X_3)$ is the **linear combination** of $X_1$ and $X_2$.  
> This will be useful in the context of Kalmann filtering.  


The conditional distribution is also Gaussian. 

<div class="transparent-box">
    <b> Conditional Distribution </b>: 
    Let 
    $\sigma^2 = \mathbb{E}[(X-p_K(X))^2]$.
    Then the conditional distribution
    $P[X\in A\mid \sigma(K)]$ is given by
    $$
    P[X\in A\mid \sigma(K)] = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi \sigma^2}} \int_A dy \exp\left(-\frac{(y-p_K(X))^2}{2\sigma^2}\right)
    $$
</div>

The following theorem solves the problem of finding a Gaussian process with a given covariance function.  

<div class="transparent-box">
    <b> Existence of Gaussian Process </b>:

For any symmetric function of positive type $\Gamma$, there exists on an appropriate probability space a Gaussian process $(X_t)_{t\in T}$ with covariance function $\Gamma$.

</div>

> Here $\Gamma(s, t)$ is called symmetric, if $\Gamma(s,t) = \Gamma(t,s)$ for all $s,t \in T$. It is of positive type in the sense that if $c$ is real on $T$ with finite support, then
$$
\sum_{s,t \in T} c(s) c(t) \Gamma(s,t) \geq 0
$$  











